<EXCERPTS from>The Application and Validation of a Social Movement Model
in Understanding the Evolution and State of One Grassroots Social
Movement in Kronos: Protectors of Kronos

A Thesis Presented for the Degree of Master of Humanities from the
University of Abila, Kronos

October 2005

Kyrla Halford

Kyrla.halford@uabila.ac.kronos

This dissertation was submitted in partial fulfillment of the
requirements for the Degree of Master of Arts in Humanities at the
University of Abila, Kronos, and the author is solely responsible for
the content.

This project was sponsored in part by the One World Research Institute
for Social Development and the Center for Change Now.

Recommended Citation

Halford, Kyrla, “The Application and Validation of Social Movement
Models in Understanding the Evolution and State of One Grassroots Social
Movement in Kronos: Protectors of Kronos” (2005). Master’s Thesis. Paper
SW1138.

  ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

  I would like to express my heartfelt gratitude to those who were
  instrumental in helping me complete my work on this study.

  Special thanks go to my advisor, Esme Nesmith, without whose
  encouragement and guidance this thesis would not have been completed.

  I am especially grateful to Elian Karel, who spent many hours
  recounting the beginning years of the Protectors of Kronos.

  I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to the people of
  Elodis who generously gave of their time to meet with me.

  Finally, I would like to extend special appreciation to Petrus Gerhard
  who shared his interview notes on his coverage of the inception and
  early years of the Protectors of Kronos movement.

  This thesis is dedicated to the memory of Juliana Vann, a beloved girl
  who left this life too early. Her courage in the face of suffering
  sets an example for us all.

Abstract

In 1997 a group of citizens from Elodis, Kronos, formed a grassroots
effort to address a problem of contamination of their irrigation,
culinary and potable water supply affecting the nearby Tiskele River.
The formation of this movement and its transformation into a formal
social movement organization (SMO) is the topic of this thesis.

  Case Study: Protectors of Kronos, a History

  Background

  Elodis is a rural agricultural town of about 6500 persons that lies 25
  km from Abila, capital city of Kronos. The town was incorporated in
  1834, but had already been settled for hundreds of years prior. Its
  primary industry is floodplain farming, and is almost entirely
  dependent upon the nearby Tiskele River for irrigation and culinary
  water.

  The Issue: Water Contamination

  In early 1997 certain Elodis citizens convened a special town hall
  meeting to address their concerns about the increasing rate of illness
  and declining crop production the town had experienced over the last
  18 months. Armed with statistics form the Elodis Community Health
  Center, the citizens pointed toward an unusually high rate of cancer,
  neurological diseases, birth defects and respiratory illness. They
  asked that the City Council approach the Kronos government to address
  the issues. The specific source of the contamination was unclear, but
  several persons believed it had to be a result of the gas drilling
  operations several kilometers upstream. This view was not universally
  embraced by the Elodis citizens at this point, but several persons
  agreed to explore the possibilities.

  The City Council held several closed-door sessions and several public
  sessions to consider how to approach Kronos officials about the
  problem.

  Initial Stage: Formation of the Grassroots Effort

  When it became clear the Council could not agree on a course of action
  the Elodis citizens decided to address the problem independently. At
  this point the SMO was in the initial stages of development, being
  still a group of citizens with similar concerns. The primary actors in
  the initial stage formed the seven founding members of the Protectors
  of Kronos SMO: Henk Bodrogi, Carmine Osvaldo, Ale L. Hanne, Jeroen
  Karel, Valentine Mies, Yanick Cato and Joreto Katell.

  Leaders

  During the early stages of the effort Henk Bodrogi emerged as the
  leader. While Bodrogi had no prior training in managing a social
  movement organization, he had served in the Kronos military as for
  four years before taking over the family farm when his father passed.
  By 1997 Bodrogi was a well-respected member of the community, very
  experienced with floodplain agriculture techniques, and involved with
  civic business groups and considered a natural leader. Around this
  time, Bodrogi’s wife, Mira became ill with cardiopulmonary symptoms
  consistent with ethylene glycol contamination.

  A lifelong friend of Bodrogi, Carmine Osvaldo also served with him in
  the Kronos military. Osvaldo ran one of the hardware retail stores in
  Elodis and served on the board of the Chamber of Commerce. Because of
  his business experience, Osvaldo became the primary navigator of the
  relationship between the burgeoning social movement, the Kronos
  government and outside agencies.

  First Steps

  The first steps of the group were to take the statistics assembled by
  the Elodis Community Health Center to the Abila office of the Minister
  of Interior, to request assistance to diagnose the problems associated
  with the Tiskele River. Bodrogi presented the health statistics
  reports at several meetings, but was met with skepticism. Feeling
  stymied, the group returned to Elodis to form a new approach.

  In the meantime, Jeroen Karel and Valentine Mies had been conducting
  research and found a GAStech waste discharge pipe from the gas
  drilling operation was spilling raw waste into water that fed the
  Tiskele River, about 25 km upstream from Elodis. They brought their
  discovery to Bodrogi, who had just returned with Osvaldo from their
  attempts at resolution in Abila.

  Forming an Identity: Protectors of Kronos

  One of the critical steps for the formation of an SMO is to establish
  an identity that will help bring their message to the citizenry and
  the government. Osvaldo proposed to the activists they form a social
  movement organization with an identity brand and a specific agenda: To
  bring clean water to Elodis and clean up the contamination in the
  River. The group formalized their identity with a name, the Protectors
  of Kronos (POK), and a logo, consisting of an open right hand within a
  white circle on a black background.

  Osvaldo reached out to an international agency specializing in clear
  water for communities, Wellness for All (WFA). The WFA Project Manager
  Joclyn Reynolds began formal scientific testing of the Tiskele River
  water, and advised the POK to engage the GAStech company regarding the
  issue of water contamination.

  Members of the POK repeatedly requested meetings with GAStech
  representatives, but received nothing but denials for several months.
  This continued until Hank Fluss, the Chief Operating Officer at
  GAStech, agreed to a meeting with Bodrogi. The meeting took place
  outside range of media, and involved only Fluss, Bodrogi and Osvaldo.
  Bodrogi reported he felt encouraged by the seriousness with which
  Fluss took the POK agenda, and told the POK he would take their issues
  back to the CEO of GAStech, Sten Sanjorge, Jr.

  Events Take a Turn for the Worse

  Up to this point, the POK had primarily used statistics about health
  issues and names of toxins in their agenda, and then on August 18 1998
  ten-year old Juliana Vann, daughter of Lemual and Neske Vann, died of
  leukemia associated with benzene toxicity.

  This event also brought the first serious schism in the POK. Valentine
  Mies suggested using her image as a rallying point, but Bodrogi and
  Yanick Cato were steadfastly against this approach. After Mies
  negotiated approval from Juliana’s family, Bodrogi and Cato relented
  and the POK began using what would become an iconic image of Juliana
  smiling down over a daisy, tinted in Warhol-esque colors. It was then
  that public awareness for POK across Kronos began rising.

  The initial results from the WFA water testing in 1998 found high
  levels of chemicals associated with Hyper Acidic Substrate Removal,
  and technology associated with natural gas drilling operations.
  Several toxic substances were found Elodis water, including benzene,
  toluene and xylene arsenic, barium, chromium, lead and selenium. WFA
  published these results in international health organization
  conferences, bringing increasingly widespread awareness of the
  Elodisan situation.

  Membership Numbers Increase

  Following the death of Juliana and the publication of the scientific
  reports, the number of persons interested in joining the POK efforts
  increased. Up to this point most of the work had been done by the
  founding members and their extended families; however increased media
  awareness brought additional interest. Jeroen Karel stepped into the
  role as recruiter and personnel organizer.

  Alliance Stage: Operations move to Abila

  With the establishment of their agenda and international
  acknowledgement of their issue, the Protectors of Kronos are
  recognized as a formal SMO, and moved their primary lobbying efforts
  to the capital city of Kronos. They stage a series of public rallies,
  and continued their efforts to press the government for action. With
  public pressure mounting, the office of the Minister of Health
  responded by agreeing to a series of meetings. By July 1999 Cesare
  Nespola, Minister of Health, announced he would sponsor a bill on oil
  and gas development, the funds of which would be used for health care
  and clean water projects.

  While they appear to have had public support, the POK continued to
  find most doors closed to them. The only traction the POK appeared to
  make is with the Minister of Health. Negotiations with GAStech via
  Hank Fluss didn’t continue due to Fluss’ declining health.

  The POK continued to press the Kronos government; however it became
  increasingly clear their every effort would be blocked.

  In March 2001 the Government of Kronos Assembly voted down the tax
  proposed by Minister Nespola, and in June 2001 Minister Nespola died
  suddenly. With Nespola’s death, the POK lost the only government
  official who was willing to engage with them.

  When an underground methane deposit ignited at the GAStech mining
  operations near Elodis in August 2001, POK demanded an investigation
  of GAStech by the Kronos government. In response, the POK staged a
  protest at the GAStech fields. This protest marked the first time POK
  supporters were arrested. One protester threw a sign at a government
  vehicle, which precipitated the arrests. POK member Elian Karel,
  20-year old son of Jeroen, was present at the August protest. He
  entreated the POK to disengage with the drivers and deescalate the
  situation by withdrawing from the road. The POK members retreated,
  allowing the drivers to move along, and Karel was heralded as a hero
  for preventing further violence.

  Changing of the Guard

  It was at this point that Henk Bodrogi and the other original POK
  members began considering they might not be able to keep up the pace
  required to maintain pressure on the government. All the men were in
  late middle age, and many were suffering health problems so common to
  the Elodisians.

  Elian Karel had been involved with the POK, assisting his father with
  recruitment and organizing rallies. Following the August 2001
  incident, Henk began taking Karel to rallies and turning over public
  appearance responsibilities to Karel. In October 2001 Henk Bodrogi
  stepped down as leader of the POK, formally handing his
  responsibilities to Elian Karel. The remaining founding members would
  follow by the end of that year.

  Karel reinvigorated the POK mission. But he began shifting the agenda
  to include an additional issue.

  It had become clear through the lack of government response to POK
  requests and the protection the government offered GAStech following
  malfeasance that an unusual and potentially illegal alliance had been
  formed between the GAStech executives and the Kronos government
  officials. The POK shifted their mission to include an accounting of
  actions by government officials. The public concern about bribes and
  corruption would change the direction of the Protectors of Kronos, and
  bring many more supporters into their fold.
