Isak Baza

IT Technician

Abila, Kronos

SUMMARY OF QUALIFICATIONS/ACHIEVEMENTS

Experienced and knowledgeable Information Technology Professional
seeking to contribute training and acquired skills within a Tier One
Technical Support and/or Help Desk role.  Works well independently, or
in a group setting providing all facets of computer support such as
troubleshooting, installations, and maintenance.  In-depth knowledge and
understanding of numerous software packages and operating systems. 
Skilled in providing Customer and End-User Help Desk Support.  Easily
identify and resolve technical issues and concerns.  Excellent
communication and presentation capabilities.

  -------------------------
  Professional Experience
  -------------------------

GASTech – Kronos Information Technology Technician 2002-Present

-   Managed deployment of custom in-house software solution for
    engineering department.

-   Helped in the re-launching and redesigning of company's web site

-   Responsible for implementation of programs and build databases that
    let the users to register unique names and passwords.

-   Supported the implementation and management of multiple applications
    for back end and web site

-   Web site updating and editing using several languages such as XML,
    HTML, and CSS

Pharma, Inc – Tethys Helpdesk Technician 2000-2002

-   Provided computer help desk support via telephone communications
    with end-users.

-   Performed diagnostics and troubleshooting of system issues,
    documented help desk tickets/resolutions, and maintained equipment
    inventory lists.

-   Provided field office support of hardware problems.

  -----------
  Education
  -----------

Bachelor of Science, Computer Science Tethys University, 2000

  --------------------------
  Professional Credentials
  --------------------------

-   Certified hardware field technician

-   MSCE – Microsoft Certified Systems Engineer

-   Member – International Information Systems Management Consortium
